Draft V 1-0

The Time Value of Writing or Can an API make teaching easier?
By
LTC Nicholas Thompson
April 2019
#pedagogy 	#feedback 	#system 	#criticalThinking 	

#####
Introduction

In the fall of 2017, when I first arrived at the United States Military Academy, I was handed a syllabus and shown my desk area that included a bookshelf full of books.  The books were, I assume, very intresting and full of information, but the syllabus only contained a fraction of them and within that fraction only snippets, really, of the books content.  Determined to instruct the class according to the standards of USMA, I set about reading everything on the syllabus and then some.  With a strong background in the International Relations literature, I was disappointed that all but one reading was new to me.  The special operations literature, while having much overlap with the political science discipline of IR in the world of irregular warfare, lacks the historic literature needed to teach directly from the syllabus.  After many hours, however, I was prepared and taught the semester to fair success.  Throughout the first year instructing I realized that pedagogy, not literary acumen, is the key to successfully transferring knowledge and critical thinking abilities to students.  

Those courses grounded in history and theory require equally complex critical thinking skills to harder sciences, but attaining the skills comes by a different mechanism.  Students must engaging material often and in a nonlinear fashion by writing small assignments that interleave lessons learned from the beginning of the course and that require inquisitive thought into focused personal areas of interest.  The interaction of writing about current class topics, previous class topics, and relating outside material to a writing prompt provide a learning platform different from harder sciences.  While different, the writing strategy places demands upon student's understanding of the material.  It is the engagement and interleaving of ideas, relevant theories, and progressively better writing skills that develops and refines critical thinking skills in students.  The most significant drawback, especially for understaffed instructors, is the ability to fairly grade and provide feedback to students in a timely fashion.  This capstone seeks to address the quantitiy (short turn-around) and quality (standardized and relevant) feedback to students.

Pedagogy has many faces and facets, and each topic of study required different pedagological practices.  In the Special Operations / Low-intensity Conflict (SOLIC) course students interact with complex theoretical ideas, such as irregular warfare (Kalyvas 2006), terrorism (Hoffman #year), counter-terrorism (Cronin #year), and insurgency (#author #year) to name only a few.  The original syllabus was designed around the traditional USMA pedagological rubirc:  write a mid-term, take a WPR, write a final paper, take a TEE, and the instructor's points are padding to make sure the averages come out properly.  I realized after the first semester that such an approach would not achieve the results I desired.  I noticed that regardless of the emphasis I put on reading, the students, on average, came to class minimally prepared.  I decided in the Fall of 2017 that the syllabus would need to change, the graded events would need to change, and my pedagological approach would need to change.  With all of these challenges, one question persisted in my mind:  how can I inspire--or coerce--students into engaging with the material?  Pop-quizzes seemed to fizzle in the first semester.  Programmed quizzes did not fare much better in the spring.  In the Fall of 2018 I tried a new approach that deviated drastically from the points allocation of my first year instructing.

Points allocation, at USMA, is the driving motivator for student learning.  Unlike most universities, students at West Point track each point meticulously.  In fact, since points play such a central role in the student's graduation outcomes, students become adept at managing when and where they can lose points.  For the best and brightest tracking pionts is about achieving the best they can.  For the lower end of the distribution, however, tracking points is about being able to attend trips and events.  Alone the points system at the USMA is worthy of a capstone project, but it is not the focus of this project.  Acknowledging the value of points to USMA students, instructors must tailor their pedagological approach around that singular motivating factor.  Surely, many--most likely the brightest--students do the readings and engage with the material because they are interested.  Those students, sadly, are in the minority.  Thus, instructors and teachers must design their pedagological approach around the average student--not the brightest student.  

How then can an instructor inspire students to engage with complex theoretical and historic literature and apply it so they understand it.  Tests and quizzes make for convenient points allocation methods, but the sheer volume of reading for a couse such as SOLIC (approximately 100 pages per class) prevents wrote memoriztion and makes quiz and test making too sujective and prone to error.  Writing assignments have a great degree of value, but become burdensome as the number of students increases.  This review of the literature addresses the test and quiz method and the writing method.  I expect the test and quiz method to show efficacy with fields of study such as math, chemistry, and physics (MCP).  While these fields certainly deserve the scientific rigor often associated with robust reviews of the relevant literature, at the undergraduate level students must learn the function and application of formulas.  The formulaic nature of MCP provides for a rich environment of testing and quizzing, which is often prepared for whith daily or weekly homeworks assignments.  

Other sciences, such as political science, sociology, and economics (PSE), on the other hand, are less conducive to testing and quizzing because the grading burden placed on instructors outweights the benefits gained by the student's need to recall the information.  While MCP often provides a formula cheatsheet, the greater qualitative nature of PSE disciplines requires more from students than quizzes and tests can provide.  For PSE, students must understand the straightfowardness of quantitative evaluation (reading and interprting the statistics associated with scientific study) and the qualitative values that give meaning to the quantitative values.  Furthermore, after administering quizzes and tests for two straight quarters, I came to discover students could score well without really understanding the material or how it tied together in the general scheme of international security and US defense policy, specifically.

#####
Literature Review
#IntroductoryParagraphs
#Quizzes
#Tests
#CriticalThinking

Critical thinking focused curriculua require parsimony.  They must be simple enough for and instructor or pool of instructors to easily implement yet robust enough to overcome the threshold between #AnalyticalThinking and critical thinking.  The rubric must also be general enought to implement across an array of topics, but specific enough that instructor feedback meets the needs of the student's learning.  Curricula whose framework centers around critical thinking as the bone, muscle, and sinew and the course content as the flesh should provide deeper knowledge into a specific facet of the course content the student is interested in and the broad understanding of the course topics.  Unlike a curricula ungirdered by quizzes and tests, the critical thinking program of study askes students to choose a topic of interest they would like to know more about (invoking their #passion), forces them to engage the material from multiple sources and angles, and #interleaves previous topics, future topics, unrelated topics, and new topics.  In short, the complex nature of a critical thinking curriculum provides an ideal platform for student learning in multiple dimensions, but without carful design can quickly become too burdensome on the instructor to be of much benefit to the student.

Parsimony in the critical thinking program of study requires students to learn a unique thinking framework and each subject generally has their own methodologies.  Political science and economics often share a scientific methods (#author #date), while sociology and psychology share another (#author #date).  History and systems engineering provide more diversity to the thinking process.  To each subject their own methodology.  However, essential to any critical thinking program of study is the training and enforced adherance to the field's methods.  Allowing history majors to default to their previously learned history methods may provide a bit of #recall, but it does not place any new demands on the problem solving #neuralPathways (#author #date) that having to learn a new method provides.  Further, the instructor loses the ability to standardize grading between students if strict adherance to the class methods remain uncorrected.

#WritingAssignments

#####
Writing assignments and the timeliness of feedback
#IntroductoryParagraphs

Why is writing an important component to critical thinking?  It stems from what Condon and Kelly-Riley (2004) call
#BarriersToTimeliness
#Tools
	#API
	#Grammarly
	#Zotero


#####
Writing Assignments and the quality of feedback
#aCommonFramework
	#PoliticalScienceMethod
	#Literature
	#CaseStudies
#GradingRubric
#Content
#OrganizationCitations
#Writing






